
 



The eighth and final season of the fantasy drama television series ''Game of Thrones'', produced by HBO, premiered on April 14, 2019, and concluded on May 19, 2019. Unlike the first six seasons, which consisted of ten episodes each, and the seventh season, which consisted of seven episodes, the eighth season consists of only six episodes.

The final season depicts the culmination of the series' two primary conflicts: the Great War against the Army of the Dead, and the Last War for control of the Iron Throne. The first half of the season involves many of the main characters converging at Winterfell with their armies in an effort to repel the Night King and his army of White Walkers and wights. The second half of the season resumes the war for the throne as Daenerys Targaryen assaults King's Landing in an attempt to unseat Cersei Lannister as the ruler of the Seven Kingdoms.

The season was filmed from October 2017 to July 2018 and largely consists of original content not found in George R. R. Martin's ''A Song of Ice and Fire'' series, while also incorporating material that Martin has revealed to showrunners about the upcoming novels in the series, ''The Winds of Winter'' and ''A Dream of Spring''. The season was adapted for television by David Benioff and D. B. Weiss.

The season received mixed reviews from critics, in contrast to critical acclaim of previous seasons, and is the lowest-rated of the series on the website Rotten Tomatoes. Criticism was mainly directed at the condensed story and shorter runtime of the season, as well as numerous creative decisions made by the showrunners, though the acting, directing, production, and musical score were highly praised.

The season received 32 nominations at the 71st Primetime Emmy Awards, the most for a single season of television in history. It won for Outstanding Drama Series and Peter Dinklage won for Outstanding Supporting Actor in a Drama Series.

==Episodes==




==Cast==


===Main cast===



* Peter Dinklage as Tyrion Lannister
* Nikolaj Coster-Waldau as Jaime Lannister
* Lena Headey as Cersei Lannister
* Emilia Clarke as Daenerys Targaryen
* Kit Harington as Jon Snow
* Sophie Turner as Sansa Stark
* Maisie Williams as Arya Stark
* Liam Cunningham as Davos Seaworth
* Nathalie Emmanuel as Missandei
* Alfie Allen as Theon Greyjoy
* John Bradley as Samwell Tarly
* Isaac Hempstead Wright as Bran Stark
* Gwendoline Christie as Brienne of Tarth
* Conleth Hill as Varys
* Rory McCann as Sandor "The Hound" Clegane
* Jerome Flynn as Bronn
* Kristofer Hivju as Tormund Giantsbane
* Joe Dempsie as Gendry
* Jacob Anderson as Grey Worm
* Iain Glen as Jorah Mormont
* Hannah Murray as Gilly
* Carice van Houten as Melisandre


===Recurring cast===
The recurring actors listed here are those who appeared in season 8. They are listed by the region in which they first appear.



====In the North====
* Richard Dormer as Beric Dondarrion
* Ben Crompton as Eddison Tollett
* Daniel Portman as Podrick Payne
* Rupert Vansittart as Yohn Royce
* Bella Ramsey as Lyanna Mormont
* Megan Parkinson as Alys Karstark
* Richard Rycroft as Maester Wolkan
* Harry Grasby as Ned Umber
* Staz Nair as Qhono
* Vladimir Furdik as the Night King


====In King's Landing====
* Pilou Asbæk as Euron Greyjoy
* Anton Lesser as Qyburn
* Hafþór Júlíus Björnsson as Gregor "The Mountain" Clegane
* Gemma Whelan as Yara Greyjoy
* Marc Rissmann as Harry Strickland
* Tobias Menzies as Edmure Tully
* Lino Facioli as Robin Arryn


==Production==
===Development===
HBO announced the eighth and final season of the fantasy drama television series ''Game of Thrones'' in July 2016. Like the previous season, it largely consists of original content not found in George R. R. Martin's ''A Song of Ice and Fire'' series. As Benioff had verified in March 2015, the creators have talked with Martin about the end of the series, and they "know where things are heading." He explained that the ends of both the television and the book series would unavoidably be thematically similar, although Martin could still make some changes to surprise the readers. When asked about why the television series is coming to an end, he said, "this is where the story ends."

===Crew===
Series creators and executive producers David Benioff and D. B. Weiss serve as showrunners for the eighth season. The directors for the eighth season were announced in September 2017. Miguel Sapochnik, who previously directed "The Gift" and "Hardhome" in the fifth season, as well as "Battle of the Bastards" and "The Winds of Winter" in the sixth season, returned to direct two episodes. David Nutter, who had directed two episodes each in the second, third, and fifth seasons, including "The Rains of Castamere" and "Mother's Mercy", directed three episodes for the eighth season. The final episode of the series was directed by Benioff and Weiss, who have previously co-directed two episodes, taking credit for one episode each.

At the series' South by Southwest panel on March 12, 2017, Benioff and Weiss announced the writers for the series to be Dave Hill (episode 1) and Bryan Cogman (episode 2). The showrunners divided up the screenplay for the remaining four episodes amongst themselves.

===Writing===
Writing for the eighth season started with a 140-page outline. Benioff said that the divvying up process and who should write what section became more difficult because "this would be the last time that they would be doing this."

===Filming===
In an interview with ''Entertainment Weekly'', HBO programming president Casey Bloys said that instead of the series finale's being a feature film, the final season would be "six one-hour movies" on television. He continued, "The show has proven that TV is every bit as impressive and in many cases more so, than film. What they're doing is monumental." Filming officially began on October 23, 2017 and concluded in July 2018. Many exterior scenes were filmed in Northern Ireland and a few in Dubrovnik, Croatia; Paint Hall Studios in Belfast were used for interior filming. The direwolf scenes were filmed in Alberta, Canada.

===Casting===
The eighth season saw the return of Tobias Menzies as Edmure Tully and Lino Facioli as Robin Arryn in the final episode, neither of whom appeared in the seventh season. Marc Rissmann was cast as Harry Strickland, the commander of the Golden Company.

===Content===
Co-creators David Benioff and D. B. Weiss have said that the seventh and eighth seasons would likely comprise fewer episodes, saying that after the sixth season, they were "down to our final 13 episodes after this season. We're heading into the final lap". Benioff and Weiss said that they were unable to produce 10 episodes in the series' usual 12 to 14-month timeframe, as Weiss explained, "It's crossing out of a television schedule into more of a mid-range movie schedule." HBO confirmed in July 2016 that the seventh season would consist of seven episodes and would premiere later than usual in mid-2017 because of the later filming schedule. Benioff and Weiss later confirmed that the eighth season would consist of six episodes and would premiere later than usual for the same reason.

Benioff and Weiss said about the end of the series: "From the beginning, we've wanted to tell a 70-hour movie. It will turn out to be a 73-hour movie, but it's stayed relatively the same of having the beginning, middle, and now we're coming to the end. It would have been really tough if we lost any core cast members along the way; I'm very happy we've kept everyone and we get to finish it the way we want to." The first two episodes are, respectively, 54 and 58 minutes long, while the final four episodes of the series are all more than an hour in length—episode three is 82 minutes (making it the longest episode of the series), episodes four and five are each 78 minutes, and the final episode is 80 minutes.

A two-hour documentary, ''Game of Thrones: The Last Watch'', which documents the making of the eighth season, aired on May 26, the week after the series finale.

===Music===

Ramin Djawadi returned as the series' composer for the eighth season. The soundtrack album for the season was released digitally on May 19, 2019 and was released on CD on July 19, 2019.

==Release==
===Broadcast===
The season premiered on April 14, 2019 in the United States on HBO.

===Marketing===
On December 6, 2018, HBO released the first official teaser trailer for the eighth season. A second teaser trailer was released on January 13, 2019, which announced the premiere date as April 14, 2019. The trailer was directed by David Nutter. HBO released a promotional advertisement with Bud Light on February 3, 2019 during Super Bowl LIII. Later, first-look photos of several main characters were released on February 6, 2019. On February 28, posters of many of the main characters sitting upon the Iron Throne were released. The official full trailer was released on March 5, 2019.

===Illegal distribution===
The season premiere was reportedly pirated by nearly 55 million people within the first 24 hours of release. Of these numbers, 9.5 million downloads came from India, 5.2 million came from China, and 4 million came from the U.S. On April 21, 2019, it was reported that the second episode of the season was illegally leaked online hours before it aired due to being streamed early on Amazon Prime Germany. On May 5, 2019, it was reported that the fourth episode of the season was leaked online, with footage from the episode circulating on social media.

===Home media===
The season will be released on Ultra HD Blu-ray, Blu-ray, and DVD on December 3, 2019.

==Reception==
===Critical response===
The season received mixed reviews from critics. On Rotten Tomatoes, it holds an approval rating of 56% based on 13 reviews with an average rating of 6.32/10. It is the lowest-rated season of the series on the website. The website's critical consensus reads: "''Game of Thrones'' final season shortchanges the women of Westeros, sacrificing satisfying character arcs for spectacular set-pieces in its mad dash to the finish line". On Metacritic, the eighth-season premiere garnered a score of 74 out of 100 based on 12 reviews, indicating "generally favorable reviews."

The first two episodes were met with mostly positive feedback. "The Long Night" was praised for the cinematography and grand scale of the battle between the living and the dead, but was criticized for its lack of catharsis, logic, disorienting lighting, and the anticlimactic ending of the White Walker storyline that had been built up for seven seasons. "The Last of the Starks" and "The Bells" were criticized for their rushed pacing, writing, logic, and deviation from character development, with "The Last of the Starks" being labeled as "anticlimactic" and "a huge letdown." "The Iron Throne" was described as "divisive," and according to Rotten Tomatoes, the series finale represents "a modest rebound" but it "went out with a whimper." "The Bells" and "The Iron Throne" are the worst-reviewed episodes of the entire series on the website, with an approval of 49% and 48% respectively, while the last four episodes of the season "plunged to record low scores."



David Sims of ''The Atlantic'' wrote that the final season "has been the same story over and over again: a lot of tin-eared writing trying to justify some of the most drastic story developments imaginable, as quickly as possible. As usual, the actors did their best with what was on the page." Lucy Mangan of ''The Guardian'' wrote that the final season "has been a rushed business. It has wasted opportunities, squandered goodwill, and failed to do justice to its characters or its actors." Zack Beauchamp of ''Vox'' wrote that the final season "dispensed almost entirely with trying to make sense of its characters' internal motivations — let alone the complex political reality that its psychological realism initially helped create." 

Kelly Lawler of ''USA Today'' wrote that the series ultimately betrayed its "identity" of "tragedy and injustice" with a "pandering" ending. Judy Berman of ''Time'' wrote that the series failed to complete the answer to "conflicting ideas about freedom, justice and leadership"; these were themes that previously brought depth to the series. Ellen Gray of the ''Philadelphia Inquirer'' and Darren Franich of ''Entertainment Weekly'' agreed that the final season was not as complex as previous seasons. Franich gave the final season, featuring "big-huge set pieces," a 'C' rating. The final season's "broseph mentality shined through," shunting the interaction between female characters. Additionally, Franich criticized Cersei doing nothing this season, as well as the ultimate focus "on Jon Snow, the least complicated main character."

Huw Fullerton of ''Radio Times'' wrote that the eighth season was not "Thrones at its best" but still had "some sort of ending for the characters." For Fullerton, the season was "like the finale — some bits I liked, one or two I loved, an awful lot that leaves me scratching my head."

===Ratings===



===Audience response===
A petition to HBO for "competent writers" to remake the eighth season of ''Game of Thrones'' in a manner "that makes sense" was started on Change.org after "The Last of the Starks" aired, but went viral after "The Bells" aired. The petition described showrunners David Benioff and D. B. Weiss as "woefully incompetent writers". As of September 6, 2019, it has amassed over 1.73 million signatures. ''Digital Spy'' reported that fans of the series criticized the season for the way it handled several character arcs and the "rushed" pacing. The petition's creator stated that he never expected HBO to remake the season, but saw the petition as a message "of frustration and disappointment at its core". 

The petition was labelled as "disrespectful to the crew and the filmmakers" by actress Sophie Turner (who plays Sansa Stark), "ridiculous", "weird, juvenile" by actor Isaac Hempstead Wright (who plays Bran Stark), and "rude" by actor Jacob Anderson (who plays Grey Worm). Emilia Clarke (who plays Daenerys Targaryen) indicated she was previously unaware of the petition, but gave a warmer response when she was asked what she would want to see happen if the eighth season were redone: "I can only speak to my own character, and the people that I interact with on the show. But I would've loved some more scenes with me and Missandei. I would've loved some more scenes with me and Cersei".

Richard Roeper, writing for the ''Chicago Sun Times'', wrote: "Over the last 25+ years, I've reviewed thousands of movies and dozens of TV shows, and I don't think I've ever seen the level of fan (and to a lesser degree, critical) vitriol leveled at this show in recent weeks". However, Roeper noted that social media was not yet widely used during much of this time period.

Lenika Cruz, writing for ''The Atlantic'', wrote that with the end of the series, "there are folks who don't feel as though the hours and hours they've devoted to this show have been wasted", but "there are many others" who felt the opposite. Kelly Lawler of ''USA Today'' wrote that the ultimate ending of the series was not what fans "signed up for".

CBS News has described several plot points that fans are dissatisfied with: the character arcs of Daenerys and Jaime; the manner of death for Jaime, Missandei, Rhaegal, and the Night King; the Battle of Winterfell being visually too dark; the "basic existence of Euron Greyjoy"; and "Jon's treatment of Ghost".

===Cast response===
In an interview published just as the final season premiered, Kit Harington said, "whatever critic spends half an hour writing about this season and makes their negative judgement on it, in my head they can go fuck themselves. ... I know how much work was put into this ... Now if people feel let down by this final season, I don't give a fuck—because everyone working on the series tried their hardest. That's how I feel. In the end, no one's bigger fans of the show than we are, and we're kind of doing it for ourselves."

In an interview with ''The New Yorker'', Emilia Clarke said she had to hold back her innermost anxiety from Beyoncé: "I was just, like, Oh, my God, my absolute idol in life is saying that she likes me, and I know for a fact that by the end of this season she's going to hate me. ... All I wanted to scream was 'Please, please still like me even though my character turns into a mass-killing dictator! Please still think that I'm representing women in a really fabulous way.'"

Nathalie Emmanuel, who played Missandei, was heartbroken when she read her character's sudden demise: "...I think the fact that she died in chains when she was a slave her whole life, that for me was a pungent cut for that character, that felt so painful". Emmanuel, who was the only woman of color who was a regular on the series for the last several seasons, said, "It's safe to say that ''Game of Thrones'' has been under criticism for their lack of representation, and the truth of it is that Missandei and Grey Worm have represented so many people because there's only two of them."

Conleth Hill, who played Varys, told ''Entertainment Weekly'' that the seventh and eighth seasons were "kind of frustrating" and not his "favorite", noting that Varys "kind of dropped off the edge". Hill reacted with "dismay" to Varys apparently "losing his knowledge": "If he was such an intelligent man and he had such resources, how come he didn't know about things?" After being "very bummed to not have a final scene with Littlefinger", Hill was "bummed not to have any reaction to Littlefinger dying, if he was Varys' nemesis". Also, once the series ran out of book material as a source, Hill noted that "special niche interest in weirdos wasn't as effective as it had been". However, Hill was "not dissatisfied on the whole" regarding the series.

Lena Headey had a "mixed" initial reaction to the manner of death of Cersei Lannister, the character she played. Headey would rather have Cersei die by "some big piece or fight with somebody". Eventually, fellow actor Nikolaj Coster-Waldau persuaded Headey on how to appreciate the scene, and she said her eventual belief that "it seemed like the perfect end for" Cersei because Cersei and Jaime "came into the world together and now they leave together".

===Accolades===

With 32 nominations, ''Game of Thrones'' broke the record of the most nominations received by a regular TV show in a single year.





 Award

 Category

 Nominee(s)

 Result

 



71st Primetime Emmy Awards

 Outstanding Drama Series

David Benioff, D. B. Weiss, Carolyn Strauss, Bernadette Caulfield, Frank Doelger, David Nutter, Miguel Sapochnik, Vince Gerardis, Guymon Casady, George R. R. Martin, Bryan Cogman, Chris Newman,Greg Spence, Lisa McAtackney, and Duncan Muggoch

 





 Outstanding Lead Actor in a Drama Series

 Kit Harington (for "The Iron Throne")

 



 Outstanding Lead Actress in a Drama Series

 Emilia Clarke (for "The Last of the Starks")

 



 Outstanding Supporting Actor in a Drama Series

 Alfie Allen (for "The Long Night")

 



 Nikolaj Coster-Waldau (for "A Knight of the Seven Kingdoms")

 



 Peter Dinklage (for "The Iron Throne")

 



 Outstanding Supporting Actress in a Drama Series

 Gwendoline Christie (for "A Knight of the Seven Kingdoms")

 



 Lena Headey (for "The Bells")

 



 Sophie Turner  (for "Winterfell")

 



 Maisie Williams (for "The Long Night")

 



 Outstanding Directing for a Drama Series

David Benioff and D. B. Weiss (for "The Iron Throne")

 



David Nutter (for "The Last of the Starks")

 



Miguel Sapochnik (for "The Long Night")

 



 Outstanding Writing for a Drama Series

David Benioff and D. B. Weiss (for "The Iron Throne")

 



71st Primetime Creative Arts Emmy Awards

Outstanding Casting for a Drama Series

Nina Gold, Robert Sterne, and Carla Stronge

 



Outstanding Cinematography for a Single-Camera Series

Jonathan Freeman (for "The Iron Throne")

 



Outstanding Creative Achievement in Interactive Media within a Scripted Program

"Fight for the Living: Beyond the Wall Virtual Reality Experience"

 



Outstanding Fantasy/Sci-Fi Costumes

Michele Clapton, Emma O'Loughlin, and Kate O'Farrell (for "The Bells")

 



Outstanding Guest Actress in a Drama Series

Carice van Houten (for "The Long Night")

 



Outstanding Hairstyling for a Single-Camera Series

Kevin Alexander, Candice Banks, Nicola Mount, and Rosalia Culora (for "The Long Night")

 



Outstanding Main Title Design

Angus Wall, Kirk Shintani, Shahana Khan, Ian Ruhfass, and Rustam Hasanov

 



Outstanding Makeup for a Single-Camera Series (Non-Prosthetic)

Jane Walker, Kay Bilk, Marianna Kyriacou, Nicola Mathews, and Pamela Smyth (for "The Long Night")

 



Outstanding Music Composition for a Series (Original Dramatic Score)

Ramin Djawadi (for "The Long Night")

 



Outstanding Production Design for a Narrative Period or Fantasy Program (One Hour or More)

Deborah Riley, Paul Ghirardani, and Rob Cameron (for "The Bells")

 



Outstanding Prosthetic Makeup for a Series, Limited Series, Movie or Special

Emma Faulkes, Paul Spateri, Chloe Muton-Phillips, Duncan Jarman, Patt Foad, John Eldred-Tooby, Barrie Gower, and Sarah Gower (for "The Long Night")

 



Outstanding Single-Camera Picture Editing for a Drama Series

Katie Weiland (for "The Iron Throne")

 



Tim Porter (for "The Long Night")

 



Crispin Green (for "Winterfell")

 



Outstanding Sound Editing for a Comedy or Drama Series (One Hour)

Tim Kimmel, Tim Hands, Paula Fairfield, Bradley C. Katona, Paul Bercovitch, John Matter, David Klotz, Brett Voss, Jeffrey Wilhoit, and Dylan T. Wilhoit (for "The Long Night")

 



Outstanding Sound Mixing for a Comedy or Drama Series (One Hour)

Onnalee Blank, Mathew Waters, Simon Kerr, Danny Crowley, and Ronan Hill (for "The Long Night")

 



Outstanding Special Visual Effects

Joe Bauer, Steve Kullback, Adam Chazen, Sam Conway, Mohsen Mousavi, Martin Hill, Ted Rae, Patrick Tiberius Gehlen, and Thomas Schelesny (for "The Bells")

 



Outstanding Stunt Coordination for a Drama Series, Limited Series or Movie

Rowley Irlam

 



17th Gold Derby Awards

Best Drama Series

''Game of Thrones''

 





Best Drama Episode

"A Knight of the Seven Kingdoms"

 



"The Long Night"

 



Best Drama Actor

Kit Harington

 



Best Drama Actress

Emilia Clarke

 



Best Drama Supporting Actor

Alfie Allen

 



Nikolaj Coster-Waldau

 



Peter Dinklage

 



Best Drama Supporting Actress

Gwendoline Christie

 



Lena Headey

 



Maisie Williams

 



Best Drama Guest Actress

 Carice van Houten

 



Best Ensemble

 The cast of ''Game of Thrones''

 



 45th Saturn Awards

 Best Fantasy Television Series

 ''Game of Thrones''

 





 Best Actor on a Television Series 

 Kit Harington

 



 Best Actress on a Television Series

 Emilia Clarke

 



 Best Supporting Actor on a Television Series

 Nikolaj Coster-Waldau

 



 Peter Dinklage 

 



 Best Supporting Actress on a Television Series

 Gwendoline Christie

 



 Lena Headey

 



 Sophie Turner

 



 Best Performance by a Younger Actor on a Television Series 

 Maisie Williams

 



 35th TCA Awards

 Program of the Year

 ''Game of Thrones''

 

 



 2019 MTV Movie & TV Awards

 Best Show

 ''Game of Thrones''

 

 



 Best Performance in a Show

 Emilia Clarke

 



 Best Hero

 Maisie Williams

 



 Best Fight

 Arya Stark (Maisie Williams) vs. White Walkers

 





==Notes==


==References==


==External links==

*  – official US site
*  – official UK site
*  ''Game of Thrones'' – The Viewers Guide onHBO
* 
* 
*  Making ''Game of Thrones'' on HBO





