


The seventh and penultimate season of the fantasy drama television series ''Game of Thrones'' premiered on HBO on July 16, 2017, and concluded on August 27, 2017. Unlike previous seasons, which consisted of ten episodes each, the seventh season consisted of only seven episodes. Like the previous season, it largely consisted of original content not found in George R. R. Martin's ''A Song of Ice and Fire'' series, while also incorporating material that Martin revealed to showrunners about the upcoming novels in the series. The series was adapted for television by David Benioff and D. B. Weiss.

The penultimate season focuses primarily on the convergence of the show's main plotlines in preparation for the final season. Daenerys Targaryen arrives in Westeros with her army and three dragons and begins to wage war against the Lannisters while Jon Snow continues his efforts to find ways to defeat the Army of the Dead. He forges an alliance with Daenerys in an attempt to unite their forces against the White Walker army.

HBO ordered the seventh season on April 21, 2016, three days before the premiere of the show's sixth season, and began filming on August 31, 2016. The season was filmed primarily in Northern Ireland, Spain, Croatia and Iceland.

''Game of Thrones'' features a large ensemble cast, including Peter Dinklage, Nikolaj Coster-Waldau, Lena Headey, Emilia Clarke, and Kit Harington. The season introduces several new cast members, including Jim Broadbent and Tom Hopper.

The series received 22 nominations for the 70th Primetime Emmy Awards, and won for Outstanding Drama Series and Dinklage won for Outstanding Supporting Actor in a Drama Series.


==Episodes==




==Cast==


===Main cast===



===Guest cast===
The recurring actors listed here are those who appeared in season 7. They are listed by the region in which they first appear.



====In the North, including the Wall====
* Richard Dormer as Beric Dondarrion
* Paul Kaye as Thoros of Myr
* Ben Crompton as Eddison Tollett
* Ellie Kendrick as Meera Reed
* Bella Ramsey as Lyanna Mormont
* Tim McInnerny as Robett Glover
* Megan Parkinson as Alys Karstark
* Daniel Portman as Podrick Payne
* Richard Rycroft as Maester Wolkan
* Rupert Vansittart as Yohn Royce

====Beyond the Wall====
* Vladimir Furdik as the Night King
* Joseph Mawle as Benjen Stark
* Neil Fingleton as giant wight
* Ian Whyte as giant wight

====In the Riverlands====
* David Bradley as Walder Frey
* Ben Hawkey as Hot Pie



====In King's Landing====
* Pilou Asbæk as Euron Greyjoy
* Anton Lesser as Qyburn
* Hafþór Júlíus Björnsson as Gregor Clegane
* James Faulkner as Randyll Tarly
* Tom Hopper as Dickon Tarly
* Mark Gatiss as Tycho Nestoris

====In Oldtown====
* Jim Broadbent as Archmaester Ebrose

====At Dragonstone====
* Jacob Anderson as Grey Worm
* Diana Rigg as Olenna Tyrell
* Gemma Whelan as Yara Greyjoy
* Jessica Henwick as Nymeria Sand
* Rosabell Laurenti Sellers as Tyene Sand
* Keisha Castle-Hughes as Obara Sand
* Brendan Cowell as Harrag
* Staz Nair as Qhono

====In flashbacks====
* Aisling Franciosi as Lyanna Stark
* Wilf Scolding as Rhaegar Targaryen
* Robert Aramayo as Eddard Stark


==Production==

===Crew===
Series creators and executive producers David Benioff and D. B. Weiss serve as showrunners for the seventh season. The directors for the seventh season are Jeremy Podeswa (episodes 1 and 7), Mark Mylod (episodes 2 and 3), Matt Shakman (episodes 4 and 5) and Alan Taylor (episode 6). This marks Taylor's return to the series after an absence since the second season. Shakman is a first-time ''Game of Thrones'' director, with the rest each having directed multiple episodes in previous seasons. Michele Clapton returned to the show as costume designer, after spending some time away from the show in the sixth season. She previously worked on the show for the first five seasons, as well as the end of the sixth season.

===Writing===
The seventh season contains original material not found in the ''A Song of Ice and Fire'' series. Some of the show's sixth season also consists of material revealed to the writers of the television series during discussions with Martin.

===Filming===
The shores of Gaztelugatxe were used as a location for filming Season 7.
Filming began on August 31, 2016, at Titanic Studios in Belfast, and ended in February 2017. In an interview with the showrunners, it was announced that the filming of the seventh season would be delayed until later in the year due to necessary weather conditions for filming. The showrunners stated "We're starting a bit later because, you know, at the end of this season, winter is here, and that means that sunny weather doesn't really serve our purposes any more. We kind of pushed everything down the line so we could get some grim, gray weather even in the sunnier places that we shoot."

Girona, Spain, did not return as one of the filming locations. Girona stood in for Braavos and parts of King's Landing. It was later announced that the seventh season would film in Northern Ireland, Spain and Iceland, with filming in Northern Ireland beginning in August 2016. The series filmed in the Spanish cities Seville, Cáceres, Almodóvar del Río, Santiponce, Zumaia and Bermeo. Spanish sources announced that the series would be filming the seventh season on Muriola Beach in Barrika, Las Atarazanas, the Royal Dockyards of Seville and at the shores of San Juan de Gaztelugatxe, an islet belonging to the city of Bermeo. The series returned to film at The Dark Hedges in Stranocum, which was previously used as the Kingsroad in the second season. Some scenes were filmed in Iceland. Filming also occurred in Dubrovnik, Croatia, which is used for location of King's Landing. The scene where Arya was reunited with Nymeria was filmed in Alberta, Canada.

=== Casting ===
''Deadline'' reported on June 21, 2016, that the five main cast members, Peter Dinklage, Nikolaj Coster-Waldau, Lena Headey, Emilia Clarke, and Kit Harington had been in contract negotiations for the final two seasons. It was reported that the cast members have increased their salary to $500,000 per episode for the seventh and eighth season. It was later reported that the actors had gone through a renegotiation, for which they had increased their salary to $1.1 million per episode for the last two seasons.

On August 31, 2016, ''Entertainment Weekly'' reported that Jim Broadbent had been cast for the seventh season in a "significant" role. It was announced that the role of Dickon Tarly has been recast, with Tom Hopper replacing Freddie Stroma, who had previously played the role in "Blood of My Blood". The seventh season sees the return of Mark Gatiss as Tycho Nestoris, who did not appear in the sixth season, Ben Hawkey as Hot Pie, who last appeared in the fourth season, and Joe Dempsie as Gendry, who last appeared in the third season and maintains his status as starring cast member. Members of the British indie pop band Bastille were reported to have filmed cameo appearances. British singer-songwriter Ed Sheeran also makes a cameo appearance in the season. Frontman of American heavy metal band Mastodon, Brent Hinds, has also revealed he would have a cameo appearance. This is Hinds' second cameo in the series, following his appearance (along with bandmates Brann Dailor and Bill Kelliher) in the fifth season. New York Mets baseball pitcher Noah Syndergaard made a background cameo as a javelin-throwing Lannister soldier in "The Spoils of War."

===Episodes===
On April 21, 2016, HBO officially ordered the seventh season of ''Game of Thrones'', just three days prior to the premiere of the show's sixth season. In a June 2016 interview with ''Variety'', co-creators David Benioff and D. B. Weiss revealed the seventh season would likely consist of fewer episodes, stating at the time of the interview that they were "down to our final 13 episodes after this season. We're heading into the final lap." Director Jack Bender, who worked on the show's sixth season, said that the seventh season would consist of seven episodes. Benioff and Weiss stated that they were unable to produce 10 episodes in the show's usual 12 to 14 month time frame, as Weiss said "It's crossing out of a television schedule into more of a mid-range movie schedule." HBO confirmed on July 18, 2016, that the seventh season would consist of seven episodes, and would premiere later than usual in mid-2017 because of the later filming schedule. Later it was confirmed that the season would debut on July 16. The seventh season includes an 81-minute finale; this was the series' longest episode until it was surpassed by the Season 8 episode "The Long Night", which is 82 minutes. Season 7's penultimate episode also runs for 71 minutes – around 16 minutes longer than an average ''Game of Thrones'' episode. The first five episodes mostly run longer than average (55 minutes), at 59, 59, 63, 50, and 59 minutes respectively. The previous longest episode in the series was the sixth-season finale, "The Winds of Winter", which ran for 69 minutes.

===Music===

Ramin Djawadi returned as the composer of the show for the seventh season.

==Reception==
===Critical response===
On Metacritic, the season (based on the first episode) has a score of 77 out of 100 based on 12 reviews, indicating "generally favorable reviews". On Rotten Tomatoes, the seventh season has a 93% approval rating from 51 critics with an average rating of 8.22 out of 10, with the site's consensus reading, "After a year-long wait, ''Game of Thrones'' roars back with powerful storytelling and a focused interest in its central characters—particularly the female ones."



===Ratings===

The series premiere surpassed 30 million viewers across all of the network's domestic platforms weeks after its release. The show's numbers continued to climb in other countries as well. In the UK, the premiere got up to 4.7 million viewers after seven days, setting a new record for Sky Atlantic. Compared to the previous season, HBO Asia saw an increases of between 24 percent to 50 percent. HBO Latin America saw a record viewership in the region, with a 29 percent climb. In Germany, the show went up 210 percent, in Russia it climbed 40 percent and in Italy it saw a 61 percent increase. In the United States, the finale was watched by 12.1 million viewers on its first airing on television, and 16.5 million when viewings on HBO Now and HBO Go apps are included. Over the season, the viewer numbers averaged at over 30 million per episode across all platforms.


 Live +7 ratings were not available, so Live +3 ratings have been used instead.

===Accolades===






 Year

 Award

 Category

 Nominee(s)

 Result

 



2017

 American Film Institute Awards 2017

 AFI TV Award

 ''Game of Thrones''

 

 



 2017 American Society of Cinematographers Awards

 Outstanding Achievement in Cinematography in Regular Series for Non-Commercial Television

 Robert McLachlan (for "The Spoils of War")

 

 



 Gregory Middleton (for "Dragonstone")

 



 IGN Awards

 Best Action Series

 ''Game of Thrones''

 

 



 Best TV Episode

 "The Spoils of War"

 



 IGN People's Choice Award

 Best Action Series

 ''Game of Thrones''

 



 Best TV Episode

 "The Spoils of War"

 



 Humanitas Prize

 60 Minute Network or Syndicated Television

 David Benioff, D. B. Weiss (for "The Dragon and the Wolf")

 

 



 Hollywood Post Alliance

 Outstanding Color Grading

 Joe Finley (for "Dragonstone")

 

 



 Outstanding Editing

 Tim Porter (for "Stormborn")

 



 Jesse Parker (for "The Queen's Justice")

 



 Crispin Green (for "Dragonstone")

 



 Outstanding Sound

 Tim Kimmel, Paula Fairfield, Mathew Waters, Onnalee Blank, Bradley C. Katona, Paul Bercovitch (for "The Spoils of War")

 



2018

 22nd Satellite Awards

 Best Genre Series

 ''Game of Thrones''

 

 



 23rd National Television Awards

 Best Drama

 ''Game of Thrones''

 

 



 8th Critics' Choice Television Awards

 Best Drama Series

 ''Game of Thrones''

 

 



 Best Supporting Actor in a Drama Series

 Peter Dinklage

 



 Best Supporting Actress in a Drama Series

 Emilia Clarke

 



 75th Golden Globe Awards

 Best Television Series – Drama

 ''Game of Thrones''

 

 



 24th Screen Actors Guild Awards

 Outstanding Performance by an Ensemble in a Drama Series

 ''Game of Thrones''

 

 



 Outstanding Action Performance by a Stunt Ensemble in a Television Series

 ''Game of Thrones''

 



 Outstanding Performance by a Male Actor in a Drama Series

 Peter Dinklage

 



 60th Annual Grammy Awards

 Best Score Soundtrack for Visual Media

 Ramin Djawadi

 

 



 American Cinema Editors Awards 2018

 Best Edited Drama Series for Non-Commercial Television

 Tim Porter (for "Beyond the Wall")

 

 



 45th Annie Awards

 Outstanding Achievement, Character Animation in a Live Action Production

 Paul Story, Todd Labonte, Matthew Muntean, Cajun Hylton, Georgy Arevshatov (for "Beyond the Wall")

 

 



 Art Directors Guild Awards 2017

 One-Hour Single Camera Period Or Fantasy Television Series

 Deborah Riley (for "Dragonstone", "The Queen's Justice", and "Eastwatch")

 

 



 Cinema Audio Society Awards 2017

 Outstanding Achievement in Sound Mixing – Television Series – One Hour

 Ronan Hill, Richard Dyer, Onnalee Blank, Mathew Waters, Brett Voss (for "Beyond the Wall")

 

 



 Costume Designers Guild Awards 2017

 Outstanding Fantasy Television Series

 Michele Clapton

 

 



 70th Directors Guild of America Awards

 Dramatic Series

 Jeremy Podeswa (for "The Dragon and the Wolf")

 

 



 Matt Shakman (for "The Spoils of War")

 



 Alan Taylor (for "Beyond the Wall")

 



 Make-Up Artists and Hair Stylists Guild

 Best Period and/or Character Makeup – Television

 Jane Walker, Nicola Matthews

 

 



 Best Period and/or Character Hair Styling – Television

 Kevin Alexander, Candice Banks

 



 Best Special Makeup Effects – Television

 Barrie Gower, Sarah Gower

 



 Producers Guild of America Awards 2017

 "The Norman Felton Award for Outstanding Producer of Episodic Television, Drama"

 David Benioff, D. B. Weiss, Bernadette Caulfield, Frank Doelger, Carolyn Strauss, Bryan Cogman, Lisa McAtackney, Chris Newman, Greg Spence

 

 



 Writers Guild of America Awards 2017

 Television Drama Series

 David Benioff, Bryan Cogman, Dave Hill, D. B. Weiss

 

 



 16th Visual Effects Society Awards

 Outstanding Visual Effects in a Photoreal Episode

 Joe Bauer, Steve Kullback, Chris Baird, David Ramos, Sam Conway (for "Beyond the Wall")

 

 



 Outstanding Animated Character in an Episode or Real-Time Project

 Paul Story, Todd Labonte, Matthew Muntean, Nicholas Wilson (for "Beyond the Wall" – "Zombie Polar Bear")

 



 Jonathan Symmonds, Thomas Kutschera, Philipp Winterstein, Andreas Krieg (for "Eastwatch" – "Drogon Meets Jon")

 



 Murray Stevenson, Jason Snyman, Jenn Taylor, Florian Friedmann (for "The Spoils of War" – "Drogon Loot Train Attack")

 



 Outstanding Created Environment in an Episode, Commercial or Real-Time Project

 Daniel Villalba, Antonio Lado, José Luis Barreiro, Isaac de la Pompa (for "Beyond the Wall" – "Frozen Lake")

 



 Patrice Poissant, Deak Ferrand, Dominic Daigle, Gabriel Morin (for "Eastwatch")

 



 Outstanding Effects Simulations in an Episode, Commercial, or Real-Time Project

 Manuel Ramírez, Óscar Márquez, Pablo Hernández, David Gacituaga (for "Beyond the Wall" – "Frozen Lake")

 



 Thomas Hullin, Dominik Kirouac, Sylvain Nouveau, Nathan Arbuckle (for "The Dragon and the Wolf" – "Wall Destruction")

 



 Outstanding Compositing in a Photoreal Episode

 Óscar Perea, Santiago Martos, David Esteve, Michael Crane (for "Beyond the Wall" – "Frozen Lake")

 



 Thomas Montminy Brodeur, Xavier Fourmond, Reuben Barkataki, Sébastien Raets (for "Eastwatch")

 



 Dom Hellier, Thijs Noij, Edwin Holdsworth, Giacomo Matteucci (for "The Spoils of War" – "Loot Train Attack")

 



 Golden Reel Awards

 Outstanding Achievement in Sound Editing - Episodic Short Form – Effects/Foley

 Tim Kimmel, Paula Fairfield, Bradley Katona, Brett Voss and Jeffrey Wilhoit (for "The Spoils of War")

 

 



 Outstanding Achievement in Sound Editing - Episodic Short Form – Dialogue/ADR

 Tim Kimmel, Paul Bercovitch and Tim Hands (for "The Spoils of War")

 



 Outstanding Achievement in Sound Editing - Episodic Short Form – Music/Musical

 David Klotz (for "Beyond the Wall")

 



 15th Irish Film & Television Awards

 Best Television Drama

 ''Game of Thrones''

 

 



 Actor in a Supporting Role – Television

 Liam Cunningham

 



 Aidan Gillen

 



 Best Sound

 Ronan Hill, Onnalee Blank and Matthew Waters

 



 Best VFX

 Ed Bruce & Nicholas Murphy

 



 5th Location Managers Guild Awards

 Outstanding Locations in a Period Television Series

 Robert Boake, Matt Jones, Tate Araez Guzman

 

 



 44th Saturn Awards

 Best Fantasy Television Series

 ''Game of Thrones''

 

 



 Best Actress on a Television Series

 Lena Headey

 



Best Supporting Actor on a Television Series

Kit Harington

 



Nikolaj Coster-Waldau

 



 2018 British Academy Television Awards

 Must-See Moment

 "Viserion is Killed by the Night King" (for Beyond the Wall)

 

 



 2018 British Academy Television Craft Awards

 Costume Design

 Michele Clapton

 

 



 Production Design

 Deborah Riley, Rob Cameron

 



 Special Award

 ''Game of Thrones''

 



 Webby Award

 Best Overall Social Presence

 ''Game of Thrones''

 

 



 Best Trailer

 ''Game of Thrones''

 



 Best Digital Campaign

 ''Game of Thrones''

 



 2018 MTV Movie & TV Awards

 Best Show

 ''Game of Thrones''

 

 



 Best Performance in a Show

 Maisie Williams

 



 Best Hero

 Emilia Clarke

 



 2018 Gold Derby Awards

 Best Drama Series

 ''Game of Thrones''

 

 



 Ensemble of the Year

 The cast of ''Game of Thrones''

 



 Best Drama Supporting Actor

 Peter Dinklage

 



 Best Drama Supporting Actress

 Lena Headey

 



 Best Drama Guest Actress

 Diana Rigg

 



 Best Drama Episode

 "Beyond the Wall"

 



 "The Spoils of War"

 



 70th Primetime Emmy Awards

 Outstanding Drama Series

 

 

 



 Outstanding Supporting Actor in a Drama Series

 Nikolaj Coster-Waldau

 



 Peter Dinklage

 



 Outstanding Supporting Actress in a Drama Series

 Lena Headey

 



 Outstanding Directing for a Drama Series

 Alan Taylor (for "Beyond the Wall")

 



 Jeremy Podeswa (for "The Dragon and the Wolf")

 



 Outstanding Writing for a Drama Series

 David Benioff and D. B. Weiss (for "The Dragon and the Wolf")

 



 70th Primetime Creative Arts Emmy Awards

 Outstanding Casting for a Drama Series

 Nina Gold, Robert Sterne, and Carla Stronge

 

 



 Outstanding Costumes for a Fantasy/Sci-Fi Series

 Michele Clapton, Alexander Fordham, Emma O'Loughlin, Kate O'Farrell, (for "Beyond the Wall")

 



 Outstanding Guest Actress in a Drama Series

 Diana Rigg 

 



 Outstanding Hairstyling for a Single-Camera Series

 Kevin Alexander, Candice Banks, Nicola Mount, Rosalia Culora (for "The Dragon and the Wolf")

 



 Outstanding Make-up for a Single-Camera Series (Non-Prosthetic)

 Jane Walker, Kay Bilk, Marianna Kyriacou, Pamela Smyth, Kate Thompson, Nicola Mathews (for "The Dragon and the Wolf")

 



 Outstanding Production Design for a Fantasy Program

 Deborah Riley, Paul Ghirardani, Rob Cameron (for "Dragonstone")

 



 Outstanding Prosthetic Makeup for a Series

 Jane Walker, Paul Spateri, Emma Sheffield, Barrie Gower (for "Beyond the Wall")

 



 Outstanding Single-Camera Picture Editing for a Drama Series

 Tim Porter (for Beyond the Wall)

 



 Crispin Green (for "The Spoils of War")

 



 Katie Weiland (for "The Dragon and the Wolf")

 



 Outstanding Music Composition for a Series (Original Dramatic Score)

 Ramin Djawadi (for "The Dragon and the Wolf")

 



 Outstanding Sound Editing for a Comedy or Drama series

 Tim Kimmel, Paula Fairfield, Tim Hands, Paul Bercovitch, Bradley C. Katona, John Matter, Brett Voss, David Klotz, Jeffrey Wilhoit, Dylan T. Wilhoit (for "The Spoils of War")

 



 Outstanding Sound Mixing for a Series

 Onnalee Blank, Mathew Waters, Richard Dyer, Ronan Hill  (for "Beyond the Wall")

 



 Outstanding Special Visual Effects

 Steve Kullback, Joe Bauer, Adam Chazen, Michelle Blok, Sam Conway, Ted Rae, David Ramos, Wayne Stables, Derek Spears (for "Beyond the Wall")

 



 Outstanding Stunt Coordination for a Series

 Rowley Irlam

 





==Release==
===Broadcast===
The season was simulcast around the world by HBO and its broadcast partners in 186 countries. In some countries, it aired the day after its first release.

===Marketing===
On July 23, 2016, a teaser production trailer was released by HBO at the 2016 San Diego Comic-Con. The trailer mostly consisted of voice overs, and shots of crew members creating sets and props. The first footage from the season was revealed in a new promotional video released by HBO highlighting its new and returning original shows for the coming year on November 28, 2016, showcasing Jon Snow, Sansa Stark and Arya Stark.

On March 1, 2017, HBO and ''Game of Thrones'' teamed up with Major League Baseball (MLB) for a cross-promotional partnership. At least 19 individual teams participated in this promotion. On March 8, 2017, HBO released the first promotional poster for the season ahead of the SXSW Festival in Austin, Texas, which teases the battle of "ice vs. fire". Showrunners Benioff and Weiss also spoke at the event, along with fellow cast members Sophie Turner and Maisie Williams.

On March 9, 2017, HBO hosted a live stream on the ''Game of Thrones'' Facebook page that revealed the premiere date for the seventh season as being July 16, 2017. It was accompanied by a teaser trailer. On March 30, 2017, the first official promo for the show was released, highlighting the thrones of Daenerys Targaryen, Jon Snow, and Cersei Lannister. On April 20, 2017, HBO released 15 official photos shot during the season. On May 22, 2017, HBO released several new photos from the new season.  On May 23, 2017, HBO released the official posters featuring the Night King. The first official trailer for season 7 was released on May 24, 2017. The trailer set a world record for being the most viewed show trailer ever, being viewed 61 million times across digital platforms, in the first 24 hours. The second official trailer was released on June 21, 2017. The season premiere was screened at the Walt Disney Concert Hall in Los Angeles on July 12, 2017.

===Home media===
The season was released on Blu-ray and DVD in region 1 on December 12, 2017.

===Illegal distribution===
The season premiere was pirated 90 million times in the first three days after it aired. On August 4, 2017, it was reported that, two days before its original broadcast, the fourth episode of the season was leaked online from Star India, one of HBO's international network partners. The leaked copy has the "for internal viewing only" watermark. On July 31, 2017, due to a security breach, HBO was the victim of 1.5 terabytes of stolen data. However, "this was not related to this episode leak", according to ''The Verge''. On August 16, 2017, four days before its intended release, it was reported that HBO Spain and HBO Nordic accidentally allowed the sixth episode of the series on-demand viewing for one hour before being removed.

Data from piracy monitoring firm MUSO indicates that season seven was pirated more than one billion times mostly by unauthorized streaming, with torrent and direct downloads accounting for about 15 percent of this piracy. On average, each episode is estimated to have been pirated 140 million times, making ''Game of Thrones'' the most-pirated television series in 2017.

==References==


==External links==

*  – (U.S.)
*  – (U.K.)
*  ''Game of Thrones'' – The Viewers Guide on HBO.com
*  Making ''Game of Thrones'' on HBO.com
* 
* 







