


'''Davos Seaworth''' is a fictional character from the ''A Song of Ice and Fire'' series of epic fantasy novels by American writer George R. R. Martin and its television adaptation ''Game of Thrones''.  He is a prominent point of view character in the novels.

Davos first appears in 1998's ''A Clash of Kings'', serving as Stannis Baratheon's most trusted counselor. He additionally appears in ''A Storm of Swords'' (2000) and ''A Dance with Dragons'' (2011). Davos is a former smuggler who broke through enemy lines to bring food and supplies to Stannis and his forces while the latter held the castle Storm's End during Robert's Rebellion, earning him the nickname '''the Onion Knight'''. For the crime of smuggling, Stannis cut off the fingers of his left hand, but for saving him and his men, raised him up as a knight and lord. Davos is fiercely loyal to his king, but fears the growing influence of the red priestess Melisandre. He forms a close fatherly relationship with Stannis' daughter Shireen.

Davos is portrayed by Irish actor Liam Cunningham in the HBO television adaptation.

==Character==
===Background===
Davos is a man of low birth, born in Flea Bottom of King's Landing to the life of a poor commoner. In his youth, he became one of the most infamous smugglers of the Seven Kingdoms, often piloting his black-sailed ship into harbors in the dead of night, and navigated treacherous shallows. He married a woman named Marya, with whom he had seven sons: Dale, Allard, Matthos, Maric, Devan, Stannis, and Steffon.

At the time of Robert Baratheon's rebellion, Davos evaded the blockade of Shipbreaker Bay and smuggled a shipment of onions and salted fish into Storm's End to Stannis Baratheon and his men, who were starving under siege by Mace Tyrell and the Redwynes. The food allowed Stannis's men to hold on until Eddard Stark arrived to break the siege. As a reward for this service, Stannis knighted Davos, giving him choice lands on Cape Wrath and allowing him to choose Seaworth as the name of his new house. However, also as a punishment for his years of criminal activity as a smuggler, Stannis personally "shortened" Davos's left hand, cutting off the first joint from each finger. Despite this, Davos found Stannis's ruling fair and just, and kept the bones of his severed fingertips in a pouch around his neck as a lucky charm.

===Character===
Davos is loyal to Stannis, due to the life and opportunities that Stannis' knighting him presented to Davos and his family. However, he sometimes disagrees with Stannis's methods. Davos is a devout believer in the Faith of the Seven, which puts him at odds with the red priestess Melisandre and the Queen's Men, who worship R'hllor.  Davos tries to always be honest to Stannis, speaking his mind instead of saying what Stannis wants to hear.

==Storylines==
Coat of arms of Davos Seaworth

====''A Clash of Kings''====
Due to Joffrey Baratheon's illegitimacy, Stannis names himself heir to his brother King Robert Baratheon. Davos supports him, though he dislikes Stannis converting to R'hllor under the red priestess Melisandre. Davos is sent to deliver letters declaring Queen Cersei's children were born of incest, so they cannot claim the Iron Throne. However Stannis receives little assistance.

Davos sails with Stannis to besiege Storm's End. Stannis's younger brother Renly has also declared himself king and tries to defeat and kill Stannis, but is killed by a "shadow" birthed by Melisandre. The castellan of Storm's End, Ser Cortnay Penrose, refuses to surrender Storm's End. Davos advises attacking King's Landing before taking Storm's End, but Stannis fears that the stormlords will not follow him if he appears defeated. Davos brings Melisandre, about whom he already has misgivings, to the caverns underneath Storm's End, where she births a "shadow" that kills Penrose and allows Stannis to claim Edric Storm, his illegitimate nephew via Robert.

Davos is given command of a ship at the Battle of the Blackwater, though he disagrees with their commander, Stannis's brother-in-law Ser Imry Florent. Tyrion Lannister uses wildfire to destroy much of the Baratheon fleet and a chain to trap it. Davos's four oldest sons are killed by the wildfire. Davos is washed ashore on the Spears of the Merling King, losing his "luck", but is recovered by Stannis's men.

====''A Storm of Swords''====
Blaming Melisandre for the loss (due to the strategic import of Tyrion's wildfire and Melisandre's religious associations with fire), Davos plots to murder the priestess. However, her magic warns her and he is imprisoned by Stannis' uncle-in-law Ser Axell Florent, who also threatens to kill Davos if he does not help Axell become Stannis's Hand of the King. With Davos is imprisoned Stannis' Hand and uncle-in-law Lord Alester Florent, who was imprisoned for trying to make terms with the Lannisters behind Stannis' back. Stannis releases Davos to hear his counsel on attacking Claw Isle. Davos claims that it would be unjust to attack Claw Isle despite Lord Celtigar bending the knee to Joffrey, as its people are innocent and only following their Lord. Pleased by his honesty, Stannis names Davos Hand of the King. Davos then watches a ritual where Stannis uses blood leeched from Edric to curse the three rival kings. After two of these kings, Balon Greyjoy and Robb Stark, die, Stannis and Melisandre consider sacrificing Edric to raise a dragon sleeping under Dragonstone, despite Davos's counsel. On hearing of Joffrey's death, Davos sends Edric Storm east to the Free Cities.

Learning to read, Davos comes across a plea for help from the Wall, and convinces Stannis to sail north and aid the Night's Watch against an invasion of wildlings fleeing the Others. After the victory, Davos is sent to White Harbor to persuade Wyman Manderly, one of the most powerful Northern lords, to support Stannis's cause.

====''A Feast for Crows'' and ''A Dance With Dragons''====
Davos arrives at White Harbor and discovers that Manderly is hosting three members of House Frey, who betrayed the Starks at the Red Wedding and killed Robb Stark and many other northmen, including one of Wyman's sons Ser Wylis Manderly. Nonetheless, Davos claims the North should support Stannis as he will give them vengeance, but Manderly imprisons Davos. He sends word to King's Landing that he has executed him, but in reality the man executed was another criminal vaguely resembling Davos. Davos is imprisoned in the Wolf's Den, but released and taken to Manderly, who explains that he could not publicly defy the Lannisters while his only surviving son was a captive of the Freys, but he has been returned. Manderly implies he will murder the three Freys and reveals that many of the other northern lords wish to overthrow House Bolton, who has assumed control of the North following their betrayal of House Stark, but dare not openly defy the Boltons unless a Stark heir can be found. He reveals that he has been harboring Wex Pyke, the former squire to Theon Greyjoy who was witness to Ramsay Bolton's sack of Winterfell and followed Rickon Stark after the sack. Manderly tells Davos that if he retrieves Rickon from the cannibal island of Skagos, the northmen will support Stannis's campaign.

==TV adaptation==
Liam Cunningham plays the role of Davos Seaworth in the television series
In the HBO series, Davos has the fingers taken from his right hand (as actor Liam Cunningham is left-handed). He references having multiple sons, but only one is seen or included in the story (Matthos).

====Season 2====
When Renly refuses to surrender to Stannis, Davos is ordered to sail with Melisandre beneath Storm's End. When they reach shore, Davos is horrified when Melisandre gives birth to a shadowy demon, who kills Renly. The stormlords bend the knee to Stannis, who plans to launch a naval attack on King's Landing and gives Davos command of the fleet. As the Baratheon fleet arrives in Blackwater Bay, a ship filled with wildfire is detonated in the middle of the fleet; Davos's ship is one of the closest, and he is thrown into the sea when his ship is destroyed.

====Season 3====
Davos is revealed to have survived by swimming to a rock, and is rescued by his friend, the pirate Salladhor Saan, who reveals that Matthos died during the Battle of the Blackwater. Grief-stricken by the death of his son, Davos blames Melisandre for Stannis's defeat and unsuccessfully tries to assassinate her before being thrown into the dungeons. During his captivity, Stannis's daughter Shireen discovers that Davos is illiterate and teaches him to read. Stannis eventually releases Davos, naming him as his hand. Soon after, Stannis and Melisandre plot to sacrifice Robert's bastard, Gendry, until Davos frees him and helps him escape Dragonstone. An enraged Stannis resolves to execute Davos, until Davos presents a letter from Castle Black warning of the White Walkers' return. Melisandre corroborates this and counsels Stannis that he will need Davos when the Long Night comes, thus prompting Stannis to pardon Davos.

====Season 4====
After Joffrey Baratheon's death, Stannis reprimands Davos for not being able to secure more men. Davos arranges a meeting with Tycho Nestoris, a representative of the Iron Bank of Braavos, and persuades him to give their financial backing to Stannis instead. Davos uses the money to hire ships and sellswords and the Baratheon army travels to the Wall, defeating the wildling army besieging it.

====Season 5====
Davos accompanies the Baratheon forces on their march to Winterfell. During their march, Ramsay Bolton and his men infiltrate the camp and destroy their supplies. Davos is sent back to the Wall to ask for more supplies, unaware that Stannis plans to sacrifice Shireen to assure his victory. Lord Commander Jon Snow, though sympathetic, is unable to offer help. Soon after, Melisandre arrives at Castle Black, having fled in the aftermath of Shireen's sacrifice. Davos realises that Stannis has been defeated and Shireen is dead, though Melisandre does not reveal her role.

====Season 6====
Davos is the first to discover Jon Snow's body after his assassination, and barricades his body in a storeroom with the help of Jon's loyalists. After the wildlings imprison the mutineers who killed Jon, Davos persuades Melisandre to attempt a resurrection of Jon, which is ultimately successful. Jon's death releases him from his Night's Watch vows and he decides to gather allies to march with him on Winterfell. Davos accompanies him, and is able to convince the young Lady Lyanna Mormont to offer House Mormont's support, though few other houses do the same. During the army's march to Winterfell, Davos finds the remnants of a sacrificial pyre and the burnt remains of the wooden stag he had carved for Shireen as a gift, and realises that she had been sacrificed by Melisandre. Davos initially keeps this revelation to himself, instead participating in the Stark loyalists' victory over the Bolton forces. After the battle has been won and Winterfell retaken, Davos confronts Melisandre. When Melisandre confesses to killing Shireen, Jon exiles her from the North, and Davos threatens to execute her personally if she ever returns. Davos is later among the Northern and Vale lords who crown Jon as the King in the North.

====Season 7====
Jon receives an invitation from Daenerys Targaryen to come to Dragonstone to bend the knee. Though apprehensive, Jon decides to go to obtain access to Dragonstone's dragonglass mines, taking Davos with him. There, Davos supports Jon's claim that the White Walkers have returned, whilst almost accidentally revealing Jon's resurrection in the process. Daenerys is unconvinced, but permits them to mine the dragonglass as a gesture of goodwill. Daenerys's advisor Tyrion Lannister suggests that Jon go beyond the Wall to capture a wight, to present to Queen Cersei Lannister as evidence of the White Walkers.

Davos smuggles Tyrion into King's Landing to arrange a meeting between Cersei, Daenerys and Jon after their return, while Davos seeks out Gendry, who is hiding as a blacksmith in King's Landing. Despite being encouraged to conceal his identity, Gendry reveals his parentage to Jon, and is allowed to join Jon in the journey beyond the Wall. Davos travels with Jon and his party to Eastwatch-by-the-Sea, staying at the castle while the others seek out a wight. Gendry returns in the evening, telling Davos that Jon and his allies are surrounded by the White Walkers and ordering a raven be sent to Dragonstone to request Daenerys's assistance. Daenerys arrives with her dragons to rescue Jon's allies, while Jon flees to Eastwatch on horseback. Davos joins Jon, Daenerys, and Sandor Clegane as they journey to King's Landing. There, they meet Queen Cersei, who is shocked by the wight captured by Jon. Cersei pledges her forces in the fight against the White Walkers, and Davos sails back to Winterfell with Jon, Daenerys, and their army.

====Season 8====
After arriving at Winterfell, Davos, Tyrion, and Lord Varys discuss the implications of Jon and Daenerys' budding romantic relationship. As the White Walkers approach Winterfell, Davos spends time with Tyrion, Podrick Payne, Brienne of Tarth, Ser Jaime Lannister, and Tormund Giantsbane. Shortly thereafter, the Walkers' army arrives, and Melisandre returns to aid the Northern forces with her fire magic. Before Davos can threaten to execute her, Melisandre tells him she will be dead before dawn. Davos survives the Battle of Winterfell, during which he helps command the Northern army. As dawn breaks, Davos watches as Melisandre removes her enchanted necklace and fades to bones in the snow. In the aftermath, Davos celebrates with the survivors and joins Jon when he marches the bulk of the remaining allied army to face Cersei.

In the final episode of the series Davos accompanies Jon into the devastated city of King's Landing, intervening in a futile attempt to prevent the execution of Lannister prisoners by Grey Worm and the Unsullied. He is last seen as a member of King Bran's Small Council, tasked with the rebuilding of fleets and forts.

== References ==

















