



The fifth season of the fantasy drama television series ''Game of Thrones'' premiered on HBO on April 12, and concluded on June 14, 2015. It was broadcast on Sunday at 9:00 pm in the United States, consisting of 10 episodes, each running approximately 50–60 minutes. The season primarily adapts material from ''A Feast for Crows'' and ''A Dance with Dragons'', the fourth and fifth novels in George R. R. Martin's ''A Song of Ice and Fire'' series, though it also uses elements from the third novel, ''A Storm of Swords'', as well as the upcoming sixth novel ''The Winds of Winter''. It also contains original content not found in Martin's novels. The series is adapted for television by David Benioff and D. B. Weiss.

Like previous seasons in ''Game of Thrones'', the fifth season continues storylines primarily set within the fictional land of Westeros, whereas one storyline is set in another continent, Essos. The season continues the aftermath of the deaths of King Joffrey Baratheon and Tywin Lannister, as Tywin's son Tyrion, now on the run after killing his father, travel to Essos, where he crosses paths with Daenerys Targaryen, who is struggling to balance her political ambitions with her dragons. Erstwhile, the Lannister family continues to struggle coping with Tywin and Joffrey's deaths while encountering new enemies; Jon Snow and the Night's Watch now serve under Stannis Baratheon; the remaining Stark children face new hardships in their respective journeys.

HBO ordered the fifth season on April 8, 2014, together with the sixth season, which began filming in July 2014. The season was filmed primarily in Ireland, Northern Ireland, Croatia and Spain.

''Game of Thrones'' features a large ensemble cast, including Peter Dinklage, Nikolaj Coster-Waldau, Lena Headey, Emilia Clarke, and Kit Harington. The season introduced a number of new cast members, including Jonathan Pryce and Alexander Siddig.

Critics praised the show's production values and cast, giving specific accolades for Dinklage's portrayal of Tyrion Lannister. Viewership yet again rose compared to the previous season. This season set a Guinness World Record for winning the highest number of Emmy Awards for a series in a single season and year, winning 12 out of 24 nominations, including Outstanding Drama Series.


==Episodes==



==Cast==



===Main cast===



* Peter Dinklage as Tyrion Lannister
* Nikolaj Coster-Waldau as Jaime Lannister
* Lena Headey as Cersei Lannister
* Emilia Clarke as Daenerys Targaryen
* Kit Harington as Jon Snow
* Aidan Gillen as Petyr "Littlefinger" Baelish
* Charles Dance as Tywin Lannister
* Natalie Dormer as Margaery Tyrell
* Stephen Dillane as Stannis Baratheon
* Liam Cunningham as Davos Seaworth
* Carice van Houten as Melisandre
* John Bradley as Samwell Tarly
* Sophie Turner as Sansa Stark
* Kristofer Hivju as Tormund Giantsbane

* Hannah Murray as Gilly
* Conleth Hill as Varys
* Gwendoline Christie as Brienne of Tarth
* Michiel Huisman as Daario Naharis
* Nathalie Emmanuel as Missandei
* Dean-Charles Chapman as Tommen Baratheon
* Indira Varma as Ellaria Sand
* Maisie Williams as Arya Stark
* Jerome Flynn as Bronn
* Tom Wlaschiha as Jaqen H'ghar
* Alfie Allen as Theon Greyjoy / "Reek"
* Michael McElhatton as Roose Bolton
* Iwan Rheon as Ramsay Bolton
* Iain Glen as Jorah Mormont


===Guest cast===
The recurring actors listed here are those who appeared in season 5. They are listed by the region in which they first appear:



====At and beyond the Wall====
* Peter Vaughan as Maester Aemon
* Owen Teale as Alliser Thorne
* Brian Fortune as Othell Yarwyck
* Michael Condron as Bowen Marsh
* Dominic Carter as Janos Slynt
* Ben Crompton as Eddison Tollett
* J. J. Murphy as Denys Mallister
* Will O'Connell as Todder
* Brenock O'Connor as Olly
* Ciarán Hinds as Mance Rayder
* Birgitte Hjort Sørensen as Karsi
* Zahary Baharov as Loboda
* Ross O'Hennessy as the Lord of Bones
* Murray McArthur as Dim Dalba
* Ian Whyte as Wun Wun
* Ali Lyons as Johnna
* Richard Brake as the Night King

====In the North====
* Elizabeth Webster as Walda Bolton
* Tara Fitzgerald as Selyse Florent
* Kerry Ingram as Shireen Baratheon
* Charlotte Hope as Myranda

====In the Vale====
* Lino Facioli as Robin Arryn
* Rupert Vansittart as Yohn Royce
* Daniel Portman as Podrick Payne

====In Dorne====
* Alexander Siddig as Doran Martell
* Toby Sebastian as Trystane Martell
* Keisha Castle-Hughes as Obara Sand
* Rosabell Laurenti Sellers as Tyene Sand
* Jessica Henwick as Nymeria Sand
* Nell Tiger Free as Myrcella Baratheon
* DeObia Oparei as Areo Hotah



====In King's Landing====
* Julian Glover as Grand Maester Pycelle
* Anton Lesser as Qyburn
* Ian Gelder as Kevan Lannister
* Roger Ashton-Griffiths as Mace Tyrell
* Finn Jones as Loras Tyrell
* Diana Rigg as Olenna Tyrell
* Eugene Simon as Lancel Lannister
* Ian Beattie as Meryn Trant
* Hafþór Júlíus Björnsson as Gregor Clegane
* Paul Bentley as the High Septon
* Jonathan Pryce as the High Sparrow
* Hannah Waddingham as Septa Unella
* Will Tudor as Olyvar
* Josephine Gillan as Marei

====In Braavos====
* Mark Gatiss as Tycho Nestoris
* Gary Oliver as Ternesio Terys
* Oengus MacNamara as the thin man
* Faye Marsay as the Waif
* Sarine Sofair as Lhara
* Hattie Gotobed as Ghita

====In Slaver's Bay====
* Ian McElhinney as Barristan Selmy
* Jacob Anderson as Grey Worm
* Reece Noi as Mossador
* Joel Fry as Hizdahr zo Loraq
* Enzo Cilenti as Yezzan zo Qaggaz
* Adewale Akinnuoye-Agbaje as Malko
* Meena Rayann as Vala


==Production==

===Crew===
The production team during a location scouting at Klis Fortress, Croatia prior to season 5.
The writing staff for the fifth season includes executive producers and showrunners David Benioff and D. B. Weiss, producer Bryan Cogman, and Dave Hill, who was promoted to staff writer this season after previously working as an assistant to Benioff and Weiss. Author George R. R. Martin, who had written one episode for each of the first four seasons, did not write an episode for the fifth season as he was working to finish writing the sixth novel of the series, ''The Winds of Winter''. The directing staff for the fifth season is Michael Slovis (episodes 1 and 2), Mark Mylod (episodes 3 and 4), Jeremy Podeswa (episodes 5 and 6), Miguel Sapochnik (episodes 7 and 8), and David Nutter (episodes 9 and 10). Nutter is the only returning director with the rest being first-time ''Game of Thrones'' directors.

===Writing===
This season features more original material than previous seasons. The deviations from Martin's novels are in part attributable to the way the television series has covered most of the novel series' published material and in part to the directors' opinions of the actors' abilities. For example, Sansa Stark arrives at Winterfell to marry Ramsay Bolton in "High Sparrow," a plotline that had been given to a minor character in the novels. In an interview, show writer David Benioff explains that Sophie Turner's development as an actress was one of the reasons that they decided to give her character more dramatic scenes, saying, "Even if child actors come in and do a great audition, it’s so hard to know if they’re going to quite literally grow into the parts. With Sansa and Arya in particular, their storylines have become quite dark. It was such a gamble and the fact that they’ve both become such great wonderful actresses is a bit of a miracle." Bryan Cogman added that it made more sense to give the Winterfell storyline to a proven actress who was already popular with viewers than to bring in a new character.

Other changes include the portrayal of Tommen as old enough to interact with Margaery and the Faith Militant as an adult, the speeding up or streamlining of several subplots, and the introduction of fewer new characters. According to Benioff and Weiss, "We felt we'd capsize the show if we put in every single character from the books." Critics particularly liked the decision to have Tyrion actually meet Daenerys at the end of "The Gift," which has yet to happen as of ''A Dance with Dragons''. David Benioff cited the television adaptation's faster pace as part of the rationale behind this decision.

===Filming===
The Alcázar of Seville stands in for the Water Gardens of Dorne.
Filming for the fifth season began in July 2014 in Belfast and ended in December 2014. Locations in Northern Ireland included Titanic Studios, Belfast and the cliff edge of Binevenagh Mountain. The Winterfell sets were in the village of Moneyglass.

Some of the scenes that take place in the principality of Dorne were filmed in Spain, beginning in October 2014. Locations explored for the production included the Alcázar of Seville and the University of Osuna. On October 14, some scenes were filmed on the Roman bridge of Córdoba. Benioff and Weiss said that season 5 would include flashbacks, which they had previously avoided, and that Córdoba would represent the city of Volantis.

Cersei's "walk of atonement" from ''A Dance with Dragons'' was filmed in Dubrovnik, Croatia, in the Stradun street between the Dubrovnik Cathedral and the Sponza Palace in early October 2014. The production reportedly employed a body double for Lena Headey for part of the scene in which Cersei appears naked.
Meereen scenes were once again shot in Diocletian's Palace in Split, and on Klis Fortress north of Split.

A town on the coast of the Bay of Kaštela in Croatia, the 16th century Kaštel Gomilica stood in for some parts of Braavos.

A very small portion of one episode was filmed in Calgary, Alberta, Canada: the scenes featuring Jon Snow's wolf Ghost (played by animal actor Quigly) who also appears in season 6.

===Casting===
Jonathan Pryce plays the High Sparrow.
The fifth season adds previously recurring actors Indira Varma (Ellaria Sand), Michiel Huisman (Daario Naharis), Nathalie Emmanuel (Missandei), Dean-Charles Chapman (Tommen Baratheon), Tom Wlaschiha (Jaqen H'ghar) and Michael McElhatton (Roose Bolton) to the series' main cast.

In the fifth season, the region of Dorne is introduced as a location. Alexander Siddig joins the cast as Doran Martell, the ruling Prince of Dorne, and elder brother of Oberyn Martell, while his son Trystane Martell is portrayed by Toby Sebastian. The role of Cersei's daughter Myrcella Baratheon, who is Doran's ward and betrothed to Trystane is played by Nell Tiger Free. The role was portrayed by Aimee Richardson in the first two seasons. DeObia Oparei portrays Areo Hotah, the captain of the Dornish palace guard. The three eldest bastard daughters of Oberyn Martell (collectively known as the "Sand Snakes") are portrayed by Keisha Castle-Hughes (Obara Sand), Jessica Henwick (Nymeria Sand), and Rosabell Laurenti Sellers (Tyene Sand).

In King's Landing, Jonathan Pryce joins the cast as the High Sparrow, the leader of the militant faithful in King's Landing, while Hannah Waddingham portrays Septa Unella, one of the "Most Devout", the ruling council of the Faith of the Seven. Nell Williams  was cast as a young Cersei Lannister seen in flashbacks, while Jodhi May was cast as Maggy the Frog, a fortune-teller.

Across the Narrow Sea, Enzo Cilenti joins as Yezzan, a Yunkish nobleman and slave trader, while Adewale Akinnuoye-Agbaje was cast as Malko, a slaver, who does not appear in the novels. At Castle Black and beyond the Wall, new cast members include Michael Condron as Bowen Marsh, First Steward of the Night's Watch. J. J. Murphy, who was cast as Night's Watch officer Denys Mallister, died in August 2014 shortly after filming his first scenes; his role was not recast. One role that was recast for season 5 was Ross O'Hennessy as the Lord of Bones. O'Hennessy replaces Edward Dogliani who was last seen in the season 3 premiere "Valar Dohaeris". Charles Dance, whose character died in the previous season, returned for one episode to portray Tywin Lannister's corpse.  Isaac Hempstead-Wright (Bran Stark), Kristian Nairn (Hodor) and Ellie Kendrick (Meera Reed) are absent this season because their part in the story has reached the end of ''A Dance with Dragons''.

===Music===

The soundtrack for the season was released digitally on June 9, 2015, and on CD on July 17, 2015.

==Reception==

===Critical response===
On Metacritic, the season (based on the first four episodes) has a score of 91 out of 100 based on 29 reviews, indicating "universal acclaim". On Rotten Tomatoes, the fifth season has a 93% approval rating from 50 critics with an average rating of 8.61 out of 10. The site's critical consensus reads, "Bloody action and extreme power plays return full throttle, as ''Game of Thrones'' enjoys a new-found liberation from the world of the source material, resulting in more unexpected thrills." One notable exception is the sixth episode, "Unbowed, Unbent, Unbroken", which was heavily criticized due to the showrunners' decision to have a well-liked character suffer a sexual assault. It received a rating of 54% on Rotten Tomatoes, lower than any previous episode of the show. The eighth episode, "Hardhome", received significant praise and was immediately regarded as one of the best episodes in the series. According to ''Business Insider'', "Despite the attacks, ''Game of Thrones'' remains a steady hit."

Season 5 featured more significant changes from the novels. Some of the changes were more well-received than others (the sexual assault scene was heavily criticized and caused great controversy). The various plotlines for the season also differed significantly in reception. The Dornish subplot received an overwhelmingly negative reception. In particular, the hyped Sand Snakes were maligned by critics and fans alike, as many found them cheesy and unlikeable. In contrast, Tyrion's storyline was highly praised. Many fans felt that his subplot progressed overly slowly in the novels, and his meeting with Daenerys was particularly lauded.



===Ratings===

The gross viewing figure per episode for the show, which include streaming, DVR recordings and repeat showings, averaged at 20 million this season.


 Live +7 ratings were not available, so Live +3 ratings have been used instead.

''Business Insider'' noted a significant difference in the ratings between this season and previous seasons. The typical pattern involves "Solid premiere viewings followed by a slow but steady gain of momentum through to the finale. Historically, the finale episodes of each season have beaten the premiere for total number of viewers". However, this season showed a significant decline from 8 million viewers at the premiere to 5.4 million at the seventh episode, "The Gift". ''Business Insider'' cites two likely reasons for the lower ratings: backlash over the rape scene in "Unbowed, Unbent, Unbroken", one of many deviations from the novels throughout the season that "have upset fans," and increased online streaming through HBO Now. It also acknowledged a possible effect of the first four episodes leaking online before the season premiere and the decision to air on Memorial Day weekend in the United States (a weekend that had been skipped in previous seasons). ''Business Insider'' reached out to HBO for comment, HBO responded that it is seeing an increase in overall viewer numbers this season taking into account streaming services, which are not included in Nielsen ratings. The dip in ratings did not extend to the eighth and ninth episodes, "Hardhome," and "The Dance of Dragons", which were both seen by over 7 million viewers. The season finale, "Mother's Mercy" was seen by 8.11 million people, setting a new record and making it the most watched episode of the series.

===Accolades===

For the 5th Critics' Choice Television Awards, the series was nominated for Best Drama Series. For the 31st TCA Awards, the series was nominated for Program of the Year and Outstanding Achievement in Drama. For the 67th Primetime Emmy Awards, the series received 24 nominations, the most of any series. It won 12 awards, including Outstanding Drama Series, Peter Dinklage for Outstanding Supporting Actor in a Drama Series, David Benioff and D. B. Weiss for Outstanding Writing for a Drama Series for "Mother's Mercy", and David Nutter for Outstanding Directing for a Drama Series for "Mother's Mercy". Nominations included Lena Headey and Emilia Clarke both for Outstanding Supporting Actress in a Drama Series, Diana Rigg for Outstanding Guest Actress in a Drama Series, and Jeremy Podeswa for Outstanding Directing for a Drama Series for "Unbowed, Unbent, Unbroken".






 Year

 Award

 Category

 Nominee(s)

 Result

 



 2015

 AFI Awards

 AFI TV Award

 ''Game of Thrones''

 

 



5th Critics' Choice Television Awards

 Best Drama Series

 ''Game of Thrones''

 





 Most Bingeworthy Show

 ''Game of Thrones''

 



31st TCA Awards

 Outstanding Achievement in Drama

 ''Game of Thrones''

 





 Program of the Year

 ''Game of Thrones''

 



 Gold Derby TV Awards 2015

 Best Drama Series

''Game of Thrones''

 





 Best Drama Supporting Actor

 Peter Dinklage

 



 Best Drama Supporting Actress

 Lena Headey

 



 Best Drama Guest Actress

 Diana Rigg

 



 Best Drama Episode

 "Hardhome"

 



 "Mother's Mercy"

 



 Ensemble of the Year

 The cast of ''Game of Thrones''

 



 Artios Awards

 Outstanding Achievement in Casting – Television Series Drama

 Nina Gold

 

 



 EWwy Award

 Best Supporting Actress, Drama

 Maisie Williams

 





 Sophie Turner

 



67th Primetime Emmy Awards

Outstanding Directing for a Drama Series

 David Nutter for "Mother's Mercy"

 





 Jeremy Podeswa for "Unbowed, Unbent, Unbroken"

 



 Outstanding Writing for a Drama Series

 David Benioff and D. B. Weiss for "Mother's Mercy"

 



Outstanding Drama Series

 ''Game of Thrones''

 



 Outstanding Supporting Actor in a Drama Series

 Peter Dinklage as Tyrion Lannister

 



 Outstanding Supporting Actress in a Drama Series

 Emilia Clarke as Daenerys Targaryen

 



 Lena Headey as Cersei Lannister

 



67th Primetime Creative Arts Emmy Awards

Outstanding Casting for a Drama Series

 Nina Gold, Robert Sterne, and Carla Stronge

 





Outstanding Cinematography for a Single-Camera Series

 Fabian Wagner for "Hardhome"

 



 Anette Haellmigk for "Sons of the Harpy"

 



 Rob McLachlan for "The Dance of Dragons"

 



 Gregory Middleton for "Unbowed, Unbent, Unbroken"

 



 Outstanding Costumes for a Fantasy Series

 Michele Clapton, Sheena Wichary, Nina Ayres, Alex Fordham for "The Dance of Dragons"

 



 Outstanding Guest Actress in a Drama Series

 Diana Rigg as Lady Olenna Tyrell

 



 Outstanding Hairstyling for a Single-Camera Series

 Kevin Alexander, Candice Banks, Rosalia Culora, Gary Machin, Laura Pollock, Nicola Mount for Mother's Mercy

 



 Outstanding Make-up for a Single-Camera Series (Non-Prosthetic)

 Jane Walker and Nicola Matthews for "Mother's Mercy"

 



 Outstanding Production Design for a Fantasy Program

 Deborah Riley, Paul Ghirardani, Rob Cameron for "High Sparrow", "Unbowed, Unbent, Unbroken", and "Hardhome"

 



 Outstanding Prosthetic Makeup for a Series

 Jane Walker, Barrie Gower, and Sarah Gower for "Hardhome"

 



 Outstanding Single-Camera Picture Editing for a Drama series

 Tim Porter for "Hardhome"

 



 Katie Weiland for "The Dance of Dragons"

 



 Outstanding Sound Editing for a Series

 Tim Kimmel, Paula Fairfield, Bradley C. Katona, Peter Bercovitch, David Klotz, Jeffrey Wilhoit, Dylan T. Wilhoit for "Hardhome"

 



 Outstanding Sound Mixing for a Series

 Ronan Hill, Richard Dyer, Onnalee Blank, Mathew Waters for "Hardhome"

 



 Outstanding Special Visual Effects

 Steve Kullback, Joe Bauer, Adam Chazen, Jabbar Raisani, Eric Carney, Stuart Brisdon, Derek Spears, James Kinnings, Matthew Rouleau for "The Dance of Dragons"

 



 Outstanding Stunt Coordination for a Series

 Rowley Irlam

 



 E! Online Best. Ever. TV. Awards

 Outstanding Drama Series

 ''Game of Thrones''

 

 



 Hollywood Post Alliance

 Outstanding Sound

 Tim Kimmel, Paula Fairfield, Bradley Katona, Paul Bercovitch, Onnalee Blank, Mathew Waters for "Hardhome"

 

 



 Outstanding Color Grading

 Joe Finley for "Hardhome"

 



 Outstanding Editing

 Tim Porter for "Hardhome"

 



 Outstanding Visual Effects

 Joe Bauer, Steve Kullback, Derek Spears, Eric Carney, Jabbar Raisani for "The Dance of Dragons"

 



British Society of Cinematographers

Best Cinematography in a Television Drama

Fabian Wagner for "Hardhome"



 



ACO/BSC/GBCT Operators TV Drama Award

David Morgan, Sean Savage, Ben Wilson, David Worley for "Hardhome"

 

 



 Australian Production Design Guild

 Production Design for a Television Drama

 Deborah Riley

 

  



20th Satellite Awards

 Best Supporting Actor – Series, Miniseries or Television Film

 Peter Dinklage

 





 Best Television Series – Genre

 ''Game of Thrones''

 



IGN Awards

 Best TV Series

 ''Game of Thrones''

 

 



 Best TV Episode

 "Hardhome"

 



 Best TV Drama Series

 ''Game of Thrones''

 



 Best TV Villain

 Iwan Rheon as Ramsay Bolton

 



IGN People's Choice Awards

 Best TV Series

 ''Game of Thrones''

 



 Best TV Episode

 "Hardhome"

 



 Best TV Drama Series

 ''Game of Thrones''

 



 Best TV Villain

 Iwan Rheon as Ramsay Bolton

 



 2016

 Guinness World Records

 Largest TV drama simulcast

 ''Game of Thrones''

 

 



 Most viewers sharing a single torrent file simultaneously

 ''Game of Thrones''

 

 



 42nd People's Choice Awards

 Favorite TV Show

 ''Game of Thrones''

 





 Favorite Cable Sci-Fi/Fantasy TV Show

 ''Game of Thrones''

 



 Favorite Cable Sci-Fi/Fantasy TV Actress

 Emilia Clarke

 



 Shorty Awards

 Favorite TV Show

 ''Game of Thrones''

 

 



 GIF of the Year

 ''Game of Thrones'' Come At Me Bro

 



 Empire Awards

 Best TV Series

 ''Game of Thrones''

 

 



 Art Directors Guild Awards 2015

 One-Hour Single Camera Fantasy Television Series

 Deborah Riley for  "High Sparrow", "Unbowed, Unbent, Unbroken" and "Hardhome"

 

 



 Screenwriters Choice Awards

 Best Television Drama

 ''Game of Thrones''

 

 



 Hollywood Makeup Artist and Hair Stylist Guild Awards

 Best Period and/or Character Makeup – Television

 Jane Walker

 

 



 Best Period and/or Character Hair Styling – Television

 Kevin Alexander, Candice Banks

 



 Webby Award

 Best Overall Social Presence

 ''Game of Thrones''

 

 



 Location Managers Guild Awards

 Outstanding Locations in Period Television

 Robert Boake and Tate Araez

 

 



 Cinema Audio Society Awards

 Outstanding Achievement in Sound Mixing - Television Series – One Hour

 Ronan Hill, Richard Dyer, Onnalee Blank, Mathew Waters, Brett Voss for "Hardhome"

 

 



 American Cinema Editors Awards 2016

 Best Edited One-Hour Series For Non-Commercial Television

 Katie Weiland for "The Dance of Dragons"

 

 



 Tim Porter for "Hardhome"

 



 Costume Designers Guild Awards

 Outstanding Period/Fantasy Television Series

 Michele Clapton for ''Game of Thrones''

 

 



 68th Directors Guild of America Awards

 Dramatic Series

 David Nutter for "Mother’s Mercy"

 

 



 American Society of Cinematographers

 Outstanding Achievement in Cinematography in Regular Series

 Fabian Wagner for "Hardhome"

 

 



 73rd Golden Globe Awards

 Best Television Series – Drama

 ''Game of Thrones''

 

 



13th Irish Film & Television Awards

 Best Television Drama

 ''Game of Thrones''

 





 Actor in a Supporting Role – Television

 Liam Cunningham

 



 MTV Millennial Awards

 Killer Series of the Year

 ''Game of Thrones''

 

 



 21st National Television Awards

 Best International Show

 ''Game of Thrones''

 

 



 Producers Guild of America Awards 2015

 "Norman Felton Award for Outstanding Producer of Episodic Television, Drama"

 David Benioff, D. B. Weiss, Bernadette Caulfield, Frank Doelger, Carolyn Strauss, Bryan Cogman, Lisa McAtackney, Chris Newman, Greg Spence

 

 



 42nd Saturn Awards

 Best Fantasy Television Series

 ''Game of Thrones''

 





 Best Supporting Actor on Television

 Kit Harington

 



 Best Supporting Actress on Television

 Lena Headey

 



 Best Performance by a Younger Actor in a Television Series

 Maisie Williams

 



 Brenock O'Connor

 



 22nd Screen Actors Guild Awards

 Outstanding Action Performance by a Stunt Ensemble in a Drama Series

 Boian Anev, Richard Bradshaw, Jonathan Cohen, Christopher Cox, Jacob Cox, Matt Crook, Rob DeGroot, Levan Doran, Clint Elvy, James Embree, Bradley Farmer, Richard Hansen, Bobby Holland-Hanton, Radoslav Ignatov, Borislav Iliev, Rowley Irlam, Erol Ismail, Milen Kaleychev, Paul Lowe, Jonathan McBride, Sian Milne, David Newton, Radoslav Parvanov, Ian Pead, Jan Petrina, Rashid Phoenix, Andy Pilgrim, Dominic Preece, Marc Redmond, Paul Shapcott, Ryan Stuart, Pablo Verdejo, Calvin Warrington-Heasman, Annabel E. Wood, Danko Yordanov, and Lewis Young

 

 



 Outstanding Performance by An Ensemble in a Drama Series

 Alfie Allen, Ian Beattie, John Bradley, Gwendoline Christie, Emilia Clarke, Michael Condron, Nikolaj Coster-Waldau, Ben Crompton, Liam Cunningham, Stephen Dillane, Peter Dinklage, Nathalie Emmanuel, Tara Fitzgerald, Jerome Flynn, Brian Fortune, Joel Fry, Aiden Gillen, Ian Glen, Kit Harington, Lena Headey, Michiel Huisman, Brenock O'Conner, Daniel Portman, Iwan Rheon, Owen Teale, Sophie Turner, Carice Van Houten, Maisie Williams and Tom Wlaschiha

 



 Outstanding Performance by a Male Actor in a Drama Series

 Peter Dinklage

 



 Glamour Awards 2016 

 Best UK TV Actress

 Sophie Turner

 

 



 Golden Reel Awards

 Best Sound Editing in Television, Short Form: FX/Foley

 Tim Kimmel for "Hardhome"

 





 Best Sound Editing in Television, Short Form: Dialogue / ADR

 Tim Kimmel for "Hardhome"

 



 Best Sound Editing in Television, Short Form: Music

 David Klotz for "Hardhome"

 



 USC Scripter Award

 Best Adapted Screenplay

 David Benioff and D. B. Weiss for "Hardhome"

 

 



 Visual Effects Society Awards 2015

 Outstanding Visual Effects in a Photoreal Episode

  Joe Bauer, Steve Kullback, Eric Carney, Derek Spears, Stuart Brisdon for "The Dance of Dragons"

 





 Outstanding Animated Performance in an Episode, Commercial, or Real-Time Project

 Florian Friedmann, Jonathan Symmonds, Sven Skoczylas, Sebastian Lauer' for "Mother's Mercy" - Wounded Drogon

 



 James Kinnings, Michael Holzl, Joseph Hoback, Matt Derksen for "Dance of Dragons" - Drogon Arena Rescue

 



 Outstanding Created Environment in an Episode, Commercial, or Real-Time Project

 Dominic Piche, Christine Leclerc, Patrice Poissant, Thomas Montminy-Brodeur for "City of Volantis"

 



 Rajeev B R., Loganathan Perumal, Ramesh Shankers, Anders Ericson for "Drogon Arena"

 



 Outstanding Effects Simulations in an Episode, Commercial, or Real-Time Project

 David Ramos, Antonio Lado, Piotr Weiss, Félix Bergés for "Hardhome"

 



 Outstanding Compositing in a Photoreal Episode

 Eduardo Díaz, Guillermo Orbe, Oscar Perea, Inmaculada Nadela for "Hardhome"

 



 Dan Breckwoldt, Martin Furman, Sophie Marfleet, Eric Andrusyszyn for "Drogon Arena"

 



 Travis Nobles, Mark Spindler, Max Riess, Nadja Ding for "Drogon Lair"

 



Writers Guild of America Awards 2015

 Episodic Drama

 David Benioff and D. B. Weiss for "Mother's Mercy"

 





 Television Drama Series

 David Benioff, Bryan Cogman, Dave Hill, D. B. Weiss

 



Canadian Society of Cinematographers

 TV Series Cinematography

 Robert McLachlan for "The Dance of Dragons"







TV Series Cinematography

 Gregory Middleton for "Unbowed, Unbent, Unbroken"







==Release==

===Broadcast===
The season was simulcast to 170 countries by HBO and its broadcast partners. In some countries, it aired the day after its first release. Sky Atlantic, the network serving the United Kingdom and Ireland, aired the premiere the day after HBO, but joined the simulcast for the rest of the season.

===Marketing===
A half-hour documentary, ''Game of Thrones: A Day in the Life'', aired on HBO on February 8, 2015. It covered one day of production of season 5 on three sets in Belfast, Dubrovnik and Osuna from the viewpoint of key crew members. The first official trailer for season 5 was released on January 30, 2015, and the season's second trailer was released on March 9, 2015. The world premiere of the first episode of the fifth season was held at the Tower of London on March 18, 2015.

===Home media===
The season was released on Blu-ray and DVD on March 15, 2016, in region 1 and March 14, 2016, in region 2.


===Illegal distribution===
On April 11, prior to the airing of the season's first episode, screener copies of the first four episodes were leaked to several file sharing sites. According to TorrentFreak, 18 million different IP addresses downloaded the leaked episodes, totaling 32 million downloads during the first week. The fifth season of ''Game of Thrones'' was the most-pirated TV series in 2015.

==References==


==External links==
*  – official US site
*  – official UK site
*  ''Game of Thrones'' – The Viewers Guide on HBO.com
*  Making ''Game of Thrones'' on HBO.com
* 
* 
* 








