




"'''The Iron Throne'''" is the series finale of the American fantasy drama television series ''Game of Thrones''. It is the sixth episode of the eighth season and the 73rd overall episode of the series. Written and directed by the series creators David Benioff and D. B. Weiss, it aired on HBO in the United States and Canada on May 19, 2019. This is the only episode of the season that does not feature the "Game Revealed" and "Inside the Episode" behind-the-scenes specials, which were recorded yet unreleased for unknown reasons.

"The Iron Throne" features the characters dealing with the aftermath of Daenerys Targaryen's (Emilia Clarke) devastation of King's Landing and determining who will finally rule Westeros. Some commentators took issue with the episode's story arcs, pacing and tone, while others deemed it a satisfying conclusion to the series. Benioff and Weiss received directing and writing nominations for the episode at the 71st Primetime Emmy Awards, whilst Kit Harington and Peter Dinklage selected the episodes to support their nominations for Outstanding Lead Actor in a Drama Series and Outstanding Supporting Actor in a Drama Series, respectively.

== Plot ==
Jon and Davos survey the destruction that Daenerys Targaryen wrought on King's Landing after she took the city from Cersei Lannister, Queen of the Seven Kingdoms. Tyrion finds the crushed corpses of Cersei and Jaime in the ruins of the Red Keep and mourns them. Grey Worm executes Lannister soldiers, telling Jon that Daenerys ordered it. Daenerys declares to the Unsullied and Dothraki that they "liberated" the people of King's Landing, and she will "liberate" the entire world. Tyrion publicly resigns as Daenerys’ Hand in protest and is arrested for treason.

Arya tells Jon that because of his Targaryen heritage, Daenerys will kill him as a threat to her rule. Jon visits Tyrion in captivity, who tells Jon that despite Jon's love for Daenerys, it is Jon's duty to kill her for being the people's greatest threat. Tyrion also warns that Arya and her sister Sansa will not bend the knee to Daenerys, putting all of House Stark in danger.

In the throne room, Jon confronts Daenerys, who blames the deaths of civilians on Cersei for using them as human shields. She refuses to forgive Tyrion or the Lannister prisoners, arguing that their executions – and a continued "liberation" campaign – are necessary to establish her vision of a good world. Unable to dissuade her, a conflicted Jon reaffirms his fealty to her and fatally stabs her as they kiss. As he grieves, Drogon arrives. After discovering that Daenerys has been murdered, Drogon melts the Iron Throne and carries Daenerys's body away to the east.

Some time later, the lords and ladies of the Seven Kingdoms convene to discuss the fates of Tyrion and Jon. Tyrion, still held prisoner by Grey Worm, suggests that future monarchs be chosen by a council, instead of inheriting the crown. This suggestion is agreed upon by the lords and ladies present, and Tyrion nominates Bran to be the new king of Westeros, dubbing him Bran the Broken. Everyone agrees with the nomination except for Sansa, who declares the North's independence from the Seven Kingdoms. Bran accepts, appoints Tyrion as his Hand, and sentences Jon to rejoin the Night's Watch to appease Grey Worm and the Unsullied, who then depart with the Dothraki for Naath, the homeland of his deceased lover Missandei.

Days later, Tyrion convenes a new Small Council consisting of Bronn (now Lord of Highgarden), Brienne, Davos, and Sam. As they begin planning to rebuild King's Landing, Bran, King of the Six Kingdoms, briefly meets with the council and tasks himself with finding Drogon.

Arya sets sail to explore the uncharted seas west of Westeros. Sansa is crowned Queen in the North by the Northern lords. Jon returns to Castle Black and reunites with Tormund, Ghost and the rest of the Wildlings, and leads them to return to the lands beyond the Wall.

== Production ==

=== Writing ===
The episode was written by David Benioff and D. B. Weiss. Isaac Hempstead-Wright stated that Benioff and Weiss told him Bran becoming king came from George R. R. Martin's outline for future novels.

=== Filming ===
The episode was directed by David Benioff and D. B. Weiss.

During filming of the Dragonpit scene in Seville, Spain, actors Vladimir Furdik (The Night King), Faye Marsay (The Waif), Tom Wlaschiha (Jaqen H'ghar), and Kit Harington (Jon Snow) were brought by HBO to the city as decoys to hide plot points. In the same scene, two plastic water bottles were spotted by the audience behind John Bradley and Liam Cunningham's feet.

== Reception ==

=== Ratings ===
The episode was viewed by 13.61 million viewers on its initial live broadcast on HBO, making it the most watched episode of the series, surpassing the preceding episode "The Bells", as well as the most-watched HBO telecast ever, surpassing the 13.4 million viewers of ''The Sopranos'' episode "For All Debts Public and Private". An additional 5.7 million viewers watched on streaming platforms, for a total of 19.3 million viewers.

=== Critical response ===
On review aggregator Rotten Tomatoes, the episode has an approval rating of 48% based on 133 reviews, with an average rating of 6.32 out of 10. The website's critical consensus reads: "If nothing else, 'The Iron Throne' is a bittersweet – if unfortunately bland – series finale that ensures ''Game of Thrones'' fans will linger on the fate of their favorite characters for some time. Will they ever be satisfied by the show's conclusions? Ask us again in 10 years." As of 9 August 2019, it is the lowest rated episode of the series.

James Poniewozik of ''The New York Times'' felt the story insufficiently explained why Daenerys burned King's Landing and how she arrived at her final character point, stating that "a woman, abused and traded like chattel, becomes so caught up in her zeal to do good that she sees anything but blind adoration as evil" was a solid idea, but that viewers were not taken "inside her perspective to make that change seem real and inevitable." Poniewozik said "small character moments" like Tyrion straightening chairs, Arya sailing west and Jon rejoining the Wildlings "made emotional sense". Hank Stuever of ''The Washington Post'', who watched with lowered expectations, said the series "sailed (and trotted) off to a noble and perhaps anticlimactic end...It was everything nobody wanted, but it was still quite a thing: adequately just, narratively symmetrical and sufficiently poignant. It went long on swelling imagery and somewhat short on dialogue." Laura Prudom of ''IGN'' wrote that the finale was "not a disaster", but also "not quite the dream of spring we might've hoped for", "struggling to resolve many of the show's lingering plot threads in a satisfying and coherent conclusion, and once again falling victim to the season's needlessly truncated episode order."

Critics took issue with the episode's pacing and final revelations. Spencer Kornhaber of ''The Atlantic'' wrote that the finale was "tonally odd, logically strained, and emotionally thin" and a "drama turned into a sitcom". Lenika Cruz, also writing for ''The Atlantic'', wrote that the episode had "pacing issues, rushed character development, tonal dissonance, the lack of attention to detail, unexplained reversals, and weak dialogue". Kelly Lawler of ''USA Today'' wrote, "Tragedy and injustice were as baked into the series' identity as dragons and battles," but the finale was "unrecognizable. It was hacky; it was cliched. Every character left standing received a saccharine coda...It didn't gracefully swerve into another lane, it careened off a cliff." Inkoo Kang of ''Slate'' wrote that "We know governance is complicated, and the show’s depiction of those complications is one of the reasons why it initially felt so refreshingly relatable – but the finale’s argument that an abdication of responsibility is the best we can hope for in a leader – feels lazy and false."

Conversely, ''TV Guide''s consensus concluded that the Game of Thrones finale "finished strong," ranking it #33 on the list of all 73 episodes. Richard Roeper, writing for the ''Chicago Sun-Times'', wrote that "over all, the finale was a solid and largely satisfying wrap-up to one of the most exciting and enthralling TV series ever," and was "melancholy, bittersweet, twist-filled and at times surprisingly humorous."  Hugh Montgomery of BBC also rated the episode 4/5, writing that the finale largely satisfies "on the terms the creators have previously set out" in the "ruinous" penultimate episode. Bran becoming king was "true to the show’s sense of realpolitik" as a "contingently happy ending", whereas the show "provides an efficient, if disappointingly uncontroversial, ending" for Jon, Arya and Sansa. Karl Quinn of ''The Age'' wrote that the show "may have resolved itself" too quickly in dramatic terms, but Bran's ascension "made perfect sense" thematically according to the show's "anti-war and anti-despot themes...After all the bloodshed, butchery and burning, ''Game of Thrones'' ended not with a bang but with a ballot." Lucy Mangan of ''The Guardian'' gave a 4/5 rating, stating that "the finale just about delivered. It was true to the series' overall subject – war, and the pity of war – and, after doing a lot of wrong to several protagonists last week, did right by those left standing."

=== Awards and nominations ===





 Year

 Award

 Category

 Nominee(s)

 Result

 



 2019

 Primetime Emmy Awards

 Outstanding Directing for a Drama Series

 David Benioff and D. B. Weiss

 

 



 Outstanding Lead Actor in a Drama Series

 Kit Harington

 



 Outstanding Supporting Actor in a Drama Series

 Peter Dinklage

 



 Outstanding Writing for a Drama Series

 David Benioff and D. B. Weiss

 



Primetime Creative Arts Emmy Awards

 Outstanding Cinematography for a Single-Camera Series (One Hour)

 Jonathan Freeman

 



 Outstanding Single-Camera Picture Editing for a Drama Series

 Katie Weiland

 





== References ==


== External links ==
* "The Iron Throne" at HBO.com
*







